README.md, before:

![](https://github.com/esitarski/CrossMgr/workflows/DevelopmentBuild/badge.svg)
![](https://github.com/esitarski/CrossMgr/workflows/ReleaseBuild/badge.svg)

# Cross Manager Race Scoring Software

Welcome to Cross Manager! Cross Manager is software used to score bike races. It has many features including support for RFID chip readers. Full documentation is in the CrossMgrHtml directory or under Help in the application.

In addition to the application help files, there is a tutorial for CrossMgr [here](/https://github.com/esitarski/CrossMgr/blob/master/CrossMgrTutorial.docx)
and an explanation of an RFID implementation using CrossMgrIpinj [here](https://github.com/esitarski/CrossMgr/blob/master/CrossMgrImpinj/CrossMgrImpinjReadme.docx).

The software consists of a set of executables.  For Cyclocross, MTB CX, TimeTrial, Road and Criterium races, you will need:

* CrossMgr
* CrossMgrImpinj or CrossMgrAlien if you plan to use an RFID reader.
* SeriesMgr if you plan to score a series of races.

If you are scoring Track races you will need:

* PointsRaceMgr - for scoring races with intermediate sprints and Laps gained/lost.
* SprintMgr - for Track sprint races as well as MTB (4x, eliminator, etc.)

CrossMgr was designed to work with [RaceDB](https://github.com/esitarski/RaceDB), a web-based database for competition management and race check-in.
RaceDB handles race check-in including issue bib numbers and creating RFID tags on-the-fly.  This eliminates most sources of administration error (missing/non-working/wrong RFID tag).
Additionally, RaceDB supports a self-serve kiosk feature that allows riders to check-in with their tags automatically.

## System Requirements

All applications are written in Python and compiled into machine code. Builds are made available for Windows and MacOSX. In order to publish results, an internet connection is required.

The minimum system requires are as follows:

### Windows

- Windows 10 x64 (32 bit systems are not supported)
- 4G RAM
- 10G HD space

### MacOSX

- Apple MacOSX 10.10 or better
- 4G RAM
- 10G HD space

## User Installation

As a user, you can install the CrossManager applications on Windows, Mac OSX, and Linux. Only x86 64 bit platforms are supported. The Windows and MacOSX versions are available as binary releases.
See the Releases tab in the github repo for binaries.

You can still run on Linux too, but you have to run from the source code.

### Windows Installation

From the Releases tab, download the CrossMgr_x64_VERSION.exe file. Run the file and follow the on screen instructions.

When running the installer, Windows will likely complain that it is a unknown publish. Click the MORE INFORMATION link in that dialog, and then click the RUN ANYWAYS button. The install will proceed.

CrossMgrImpinj, TagReadWriter, CrossMgrAlien, CrossMgrVideo, SeriesMgr, PointsRaceMgr and SprintMgr follow the same install process. They will all install into the CrossMgr program group.

### Mac OSX Installation

From the Releases tab, download the CrossMgr-VERSION.dmg file. From the finder, double click the DMG file to open it. Once the window comes up, you simply drag and drop the CrossMgr.app folder to your Applications directory. From the Applications folder, you can now run CrossMgr like any other Mac app

Most recent Mac OSX versions will require you to press CTRL before clicking on the app for the first time, and then clicking open. The app is a non-signed program that MacOSX will not open otherwise. This is only require the first time you run it. MacOSX will also ask a few questions when the program is run, and you must confirm with YES (Allow Networking, Access to Documents Directory, etc, etc.)

CrossMgrImpinj, TagReadWriter, CrossMgrAlien, CrossMgrVideo, SeriesMgr, PointsRaceMgr and SprintMgr follow the same install process.

#### Debugging the Mac Apps

Because MacOSX has added a lot of security to the system, some weird problems can occur that prevent the application from starting
First, and foremost, because the apps are not signed, you must CTRL-CLICK the icon, and select Open from the pop up menu, and then click Open on the dialog box to start the application the first time
Additionally, MacOSX will prompt the user for permissions to access the network, documents folder, etc...
Sometimes, the splash screens for the application will cover this dialog box up, or it could end up behind the application.
Unless you select ALLOW, the application can't work. For example, CrossMgr requires network access to run.
Additionally, sometimes the application just won't start. Typically, it's icon will start to flash, and then nothing.
To see why and what is happening, run the application from the command line from the app's MacOS directory. For example, for CrossMgr:

```bash
cd /Applications/CrossMgr.app/Content/MacOS
./CrossMgr
```

Python is set up to dump logs to stdout which usually indicates the problem. Sometimes, the problem of starting the application will just go away.

### Linux Installation

Follow the instructions for building CrossMgr on your system.  Check the wxPython web page for specific instructions for how to install it on your distro.

## Building Cross Manager (for developers)

There are two scripts to build CrossMgr and the associated tools. One for Linux/Mac and one for Windows
Each platform has a build script to install the dependancies, build the binaries for the application, and package the programs.

| Script  | Help Parameter |Purpose |
|---------|---------|--------|
| compile.sh | -h | Linux/MacOSX Build script |
| compile.ps1 | -help | Windows build script |

Use the help parameter to find the available command line options. You can build programs individual or run parts of the build process individual using different command line options.

All platforms currently work with Python 3.7.x. Python 3.8 and newer is not yet supported by pyinstaller which freezes the python code to binary form.

Windows builds require InnoSetup V6.x from [https://www.jrsoftware.org/isdl.php]. If you do not have Inno Setup installed, the windows build will fail.

The build has been automated, and compile.sh/ps1 script does everything to enable the developer to build CrossMgr and the associated tools. However, you can also download the binary from the github Releases tab.

Linux dependancies are contained in the linuxdeps.sh script.

The build procedure for Linux and MacOSX platforms are as follows:

- Install the Linux dependancies (Linux only!)

```bash
  bash linuxdeps.sh
```

- Setup a virtual env, download the required python modules:

```bash
bash compile.sh -S
```

- Build all the code and publish to releases directory

```bash
bash compile.sh -a -A
```

When the build is complete, the resultant DMG/AppImage files will be in the release directory. The above process is what the build.yml Workflow file (.github/workflows/build.yaml) uses to build the code on GitHub.

The build procedure for windows are as follows:

- Setup a virtual env, download the required python modules:

```powershell
.\compile.ps1 -setupenv
```

- Build all the code and publish to releases directory

```powershell
.\compile.ps1 -all -everything
```
When the build is complete, the resultant exe installer files will be in the release directory. The above process is what the build.yml Workflow file (.github/workflows/devbuild.yaml) uses to build the code on GitHub.

### Making a Release

By default, the version of the programs is setup with -private in the name to indicate any local builds are alpha versions and not meant for distribution. Any local builds will receive this version number tag and it will be displays on startup and in the About dialog. Updating the version number for any one of the applications requires that this private tag remain intacted, or the build will fail on github. The private tag is replaced with the appropriate version by the build script on github on a development or release build.

With the workflow setup on Github, builds are automatic. Development is a two stream or branch system. The dev branch is where all development work occurs. Developers are encouraged to branch dev into feature and bugfix branches to do actual work, and then merge changes back into dev. Changes to the dev branch pushed to github are automatically built as a "Development Release" under the 'latest' tag. Only one development release is available at any one time. The purpose of the development release is to allow for beta testing of new code before it is released. The version number of all applications will be denoted with "beta" and the git short release number to ensure users can report issues against a specific version.

When code is complete, and ready for a production release, the code is merged back into master, and tagged with a semver style tag. The tag format must be in the format v3.0.0-2020010101010. The tag number is used to create the version number for each application. The build is setup to reject building a release where the tag is not this format. Developers should use the compile script to create the release to ensure a proper merge and tag is created. The build system automatically creates a release build on github when the tag is detected and places the binaries in the Releases tab on github.

Every time a build is run, github will build the code. The purpose of this build is to ensure the code will build on all platforms. When a release is added, it will appear in the releases tab, and github will run the workflow to build the code for MacOSX, Linux, and Windows.

To make a release, do the following:

Linux/Mac:

```bash
bash compile.sh -r
```

Windows:

```powershell
.\compile.ps1 -release
```

You must be on the dev branch without any pending changes to make a release. If the version number of an application is to be incremented, it should be done in the dev branch, and checked in prior to making the release.

A build can also be forced by tagging the master branch.  This is done with the -T option (Linux/Mac) and -tag (windows). You can only tag the master branch with this option.

Commit message:

Added info about how to disable/enable GateKeeper

README.md, after:

![](https://github.com/esitarski/CrossMgr/workflows/DevelopmentBuild/badge.svg)
![](https://github.com/esitarski/CrossMgr/workflows/ReleaseBuild/badge.svg)

# Cross Manager Race Scoring Software

Welcome to Cross Manager! Cross Manager is software used to score bike races. It has many features including support for RFID chip readers. Full documentation is in the CrossMgrHtml directory or under Help in the application.

In addition to the application help files, there is a tutorial for CrossMgr [here](/https://github.com/esitarski/CrossMgr/blob/master/CrossMgrTutorial.docx)
and an explanation of an RFID implementation using CrossMgrIpinj [here](https://github.com/esitarski/CrossMgr/blob/master/CrossMgrImpinj/CrossMgrImpinjReadme.docx).

The software consists of a set of executables.  For Cyclocross, MTB CX, TimeTrial, Road and Criterium races, you will need:

* CrossMgr
* CrossMgrImpinj or CrossMgrAlien if you plan to use an RFID reader.
* SeriesMgr if you plan to score a series of races.

If you are scoring Track races you will need:

* PointsRaceMgr - for scoring races with intermediate sprints and Laps gained/lost.
* SprintMgr - for Track sprint races as well as MTB (4x, eliminator, etc.)

CrossMgr was designed to work with [RaceDB](https://github.com/esitarski/RaceDB), a web-based database for competition management and race check-in.
RaceDB handles race check-in including issue bib numbers and creating RFID tags on-the-fly.  This eliminates most sources of administration error (missing/non-working/wrong RFID tag).
Additionally, RaceDB supports a self-serve kiosk feature that allows riders to check-in with their tags automatically.

## System Requirements

All applications are written in Python and compiled into machine code. Builds are made available for Windows and MacOSX. In order to publish results, an internet connection is required.

The minimum system requires are as follows:

### Windows

- Windows 10 x64 (32 bit systems are not supported)
- 4G RAM
- 10G HD space

### MacOSX

- Apple MacOSX 10.10 or better
- 4G RAM
- 10G HD space

## User Installation

As a user, you can install the CrossManager applications on Windows, Mac OSX, and Linux. Only x86 64 bit platforms are supported. The Windows and MacOSX versions are available as binary releases.
See the Releases tab in the github repo for binaries.

You can still run on Linux too, but you have to run from the source code.

### Windows Installation

From the Releases tab, download the CrossMgr_x64_VERSION.exe file. Run the file and follow the on screen instructions.

When running the installer, Windows will likely complain that it is a unknown publish. Click the MORE INFORMATION link in that dialog, and then click the RUN ANYWAYS button. The install will proceed.

CrossMgrImpinj, TagReadWriter, CrossMgrAlien, CrossMgrVideo, SeriesMgr, PointsRaceMgr and SprintMgr follow the same install process. They will all install into the CrossMgr program group.

### Mac OSX Installation

From the Releases tab, download the CrossMgr-VERSION.dmg file. From the finder, double click the DMG file to open it. Once the window comes up, you simply drag and drop the CrossMgr.app folder to your Applications directory. From the Applications folder, you can now run CrossMgr like any other Mac app

If you still get a message that the dmg file is damaged and to delete it, you will need to temporarily disable GateKeeper to complete the install.  To do so, open a Terminal and enter:

    sudo spctl --master-disable
    
Then, double-click on the CrossMgr .dmg file.

Re-enable GateKeeper from the terminal as follows:

    sudo spctl --master-enable

Some Mac OSX versions accept pressing CTRL before clicking on the app for the first time, and then clicking open. The app is a non-signed program that MacOSX will not open otherwise. This is only require the first time you run it. MacOSX will also ask a few questions when the program is run, and you must confirm with YES (Allow Networking, Access to Documents Directory, etc, etc.)

CrossMgrImpinj, TagReadWriter, CrossMgrAlien, CrossMgrVideo, SeriesMgr, PointsRaceMgr and SprintMgr follow the same install process.

#### Debugging the Mac Apps

Because MacOSX has added a lot of security to the system, some weird problems can occur that prevent the application from starting.

First, and foremost, because the apps are not signed, you must CTRL-CLICK the icon, and select Open from the pop up menu, and then click Open on the dialog box to start the application the first time
Additionally, MacOSX will prompt the user for permissions to access the network, documents folder, etc...
Sometimes, the splash screens for the application will cover this dialog box up, or it could end up behind the application.
Unless you select ALLOW, the application can't work. For example, CrossMgr requires network access to run.
Additionally, sometimes the application just won't start. Typically, it's icon will start to flash, and then nothing.
To see why and what is happening, run the application from the command line from the app's MacOS directory. For example, for CrossMgr:

```bash
cd /Applications/CrossMgr.app/Content/MacOS
./CrossMgr
```

Python is set up to dump logs to stdout which usually indicates the problem. Sometimes, the problem of starting the application will just go away.

### Linux Installation

Follow the instructions for building CrossMgr on your system.  Check the wxPython web page for specific instructions for how to install it on your distro.

## Building Cross Manager (for developers)

There are two scripts to build CrossMgr and the associated tools. One for Linux/Mac and one for Windows
Each platform has a build script to install the dependancies, build the binaries for the application, and package the programs.

| Script  | Help Parameter |Purpose |
|---------|---------|--------|
| compile.sh | -h | Linux/MacOSX Build script |
| compile.ps1 | -help | Windows build script |

Use the help parameter to find the available command line options. You can build programs individual or run parts of the build process individual using different command line options.

All platforms currently work with Python 3.7.x. Python 3.8 and newer is not yet supported by pyinstaller which freezes the python code to binary form.

Windows builds require InnoSetup V6.x from [https://www.jrsoftware.org/isdl.php]. If you do not have Inno Setup installed, the windows build will fail.

The build has been automated, and compile.sh/ps1 script does everything to enable the developer to build CrossMgr and the associated tools. However, you can also download the binary from the github Releases tab.

Linux dependancies are contained in the linuxdeps.sh script.

The build procedure for Linux and MacOSX platforms are as follows:

- Install the Linux dependancies (Linux only!)

```bash
  bash linuxdeps.sh
```

- Setup a virtual env, download the required python modules:

```bash
bash compile.sh -S
```

- Build all the code and publish to releases directory

```bash
bash compile.sh -a -A
```

When the build is complete, the resultant DMG/AppImage files will be in the release directory. The above process is what the build.yml Workflow file (.github/workflows/build.yaml) uses to build the code on GitHub.

The build procedure for windows are as follows:

- Setup a virtual env, download the required python modules:

```powershell
.\compile.ps1 -setupenv
```

- Build all the code and publish to releases directory

```powershell
.\compile.ps1 -all -everything
```
When the build is complete, the resultant exe installer files will be in the release directory. The above process is what the build.yml Workflow file (.github/workflows/devbuild.yaml) uses to build the code on GitHub.

### Making a Release

By default, the version of the programs is setup with -private in the name to indicate any local builds are alpha versions and not meant for distribution. Any local builds will receive this version number tag and it will be displays on startup and in the About dialog. Updating the version number for any one of the applications requires that this private tag remain intacted, or the build will fail on github. The private tag is replaced with the appropriate version by the build script on github on a development or release build.

With the workflow setup on Github, builds are automatic. Development is a two stream or branch system. The dev branch is where all development work occurs. Developers are encouraged to branch dev into feature and bugfix branches to do actual work, and then merge changes back into dev. Changes to the dev branch pushed to github are automatically built as a "Development Release" under the 'latest' tag. Only one development release is available at any one time. The purpose of the development release is to allow for beta testing of new code before it is released. The version number of all applications will be denoted with "beta" and the git short release number to ensure users can report issues against a specific version.

When code is complete, and ready for a production release, the code is merged back into master, and tagged with a semver style tag. The tag format must be in the format v3.0.0-2020010101010. The tag number is used to create the version number for each application. The build is setup to reject building a release where the tag is not this format. Developers should use the compile script to create the release to ensure a proper merge and tag is created. The build system automatically creates a release build on github when the tag is detected and places the binaries in the Releases tab on github.

Every time a build is run, github will build the code. The purpose of this build is to ensure the code will build on all platforms. When a release is added, it will appear in the releases tab, and github will run the workflow to build the code for MacOSX, Linux, and Windows.

To make a release, do the following:

Linux/Mac:

```bash
bash compile.sh -r
```

Windows:

```powershell
.\compile.ps1 -release
```

You must be on the dev branch without any pending changes to make a release. If the version number of an application is to be incremented, it should be done in the dev branch, and checked in prior to making the release.

A build can also be forced by tagging the master branch.  This is done with the -T option (Linux/Mac) and -tag (windows). You can only tag the master branch with this option.
