helptxt/MainScreen.md, before:

[TOC]

# Main Screen
The Main Screen is divided into three major areas:

1. [Expected](#expected)
1. [Recorded](#recorded)
1. [Tabbed Screens](#screens)

The Expected and Recorded lists are on the left, the Tabbed Screens is the main field.

All the areas can be controlled my dragging the "sash" separating the windows.

If you prefer the Expected and Recorded lists to be side-by-side instead of stacked, double-click on the sash between them.  Double-click to return to the original configuration.

# Expected
Shows the numbers of riders expected to arrive.  The columns in the table are as follows:

Column|Description
:-----|:----------
Bib|The rider's number
Note|Shows the riders position by category.  Leaders are highlighted in green.  The Race Leader is highlighted with a full green bar.  Riders outside of the 80% time rule are shown in red.
Lap|Shows the lap the rider is currently on.
ETA|Shows the Estimated Time of Arrival of the rider
Name|Shows the rider's name.  Requires configuring the [External Excel][] sheet.

## Click on the Row
Enters that number.  Eliminates retyping the number in Record screen.

## Right-Click on the Row

Option|Action
:-----|:-----
Enter...|Correct the current entry
DNF...|Mark this rider as DNF
Pull...|Pull this rider from the race (like DNF)
RiderDetail|Jump to the RiderDetail for this rider.

# Recorded
Shows the numbers just recorded during a race.  Between each group of riders (>= 1 second apart), a summary row is added showing the number of riders in the group (in brackets, shown in the __Num__ column) and the gap between groups (shown in the __Time__ column).

The columns in the table are as follows:

Column|Description
:-----|:----------
Bib|The rider's number
Note|Shows the riders position by category.  Leaders are highlighted in green.  The Race Leader is highlighted with a full green bar.  Riders outside of the 80% time rule are shown in red.
Lap|Shows the lap the rider is currently on.
Time|Shows the recorded time
Name|Shows the rider's name.  Requires linking an [External Excel][] sheet.

## Double-click
Jumps to the RiderDetail for the number clicked on.

## Right-Click
Right-click brings up a number of options about what you clicked on:

Option|Action
:-----|:-----
Correct...|Correct the current entry
Shift...|Shift current entry forward/backward in time
Split...|Split the current entry into two entries
Insert...|Insert a new time near an existing time
Delete...|Delete current entry
DNF...|Mark this rider as DNF
RiderDetail|Jump to the RiderDetail for this rider.

# Screens

Each screen can be selected by clicking on the tab at the top of the screen, or pressing the function key corresponding to the number on the tab.
For example, F3 selects the Results screen.

* [Actions][]
* [Record][]
* [Results][]
* [Pulled][]
* [Passings][]
* [RiderDetail][]
* [Chart][]
* [Animation][]
* [Recommendations][]
* [Categories][]
* [Properties][]

# Keyboard Accelerators

The following keyboard accelerators work from all screens:

Key|Action
:--|:-----
Ctrl-Z|Undo the last edit.  Multiple undos will keep undoing the last changes.
Ctrl-Y|Redo the last undo.  Multiple redos will keep redoing the last undos.
Ctrl-F|Opens the Find window.
Function Key 1..10|Jumps to the screen with the same number as the function key.
Shift-F1|Opens Help on the current screen.
Ctrl-H|Opens Help for the current screen in a web browser.  For full help, use the Help/Help menu.

#Edit Ctrl Keys

The following Ctrl keys work in all edit fields.  You can also cut-and-paste from external sources to/from CrossMgr.

Key|Action
:--|:-----
Ctrl-C|Copy selected text to clipboard
Ctrl-V|Paste clipboard text into edit field
Ctrl-X|Cut selected text to clipboard
Esc|Abort edit and restore previous value

Commit message:

Roughed in early pull (disabled in release). Fixed initialization in TTCountdown.html so that the audio is not created until the user presses the button.

helptxt/MainScreen.md, after:

[TOC]

# Main Screen
The Main Screen is divided into three major areas:

1. [Expected](#expected)
1. [Recorded](#recorded)
1. [Tabbed Screens](#screens)

The Expected and Recorded lists are on the left, the Tabbed Screens is the main field.

All the areas can be controlled my dragging the "sash" separating the windows.

If you prefer the Expected and Recorded lists to be side-by-side instead of stacked, double-click on the sash between them.  Double-click to return to the original configuration.

# Expected
Shows the numbers of riders expected to arrive.  The columns in the table are as follows:

Column|Description
:-----|:----------
Bib|The rider's number
Note|Shows the riders position by category.  Leaders are highlighted in green.  The Race Leader is highlighted with a full green bar.  Riders outside of the 80% time rule are shown in red.  Riders eligible for "Early Pull" are shown in yellow with a pull symbol (⌦).  Riders starting their laps lap have a bell (🔔).  Riders finishing has a finish flag (🏁).
Lap|Shows the lap the rider is currently on.
ETA|Shows the Estimated Time of Arrival of the rider
Name|Shows the rider's name.  Requires configuring the [External Excel][] sheet.

__Early Pull__

__Early Pull__ is a method of managing the 80% zone at the finish line when then 80% rule is in effect (MTB and Cyclocross),.
The rider is pulled after crossing the finish line and recording a final time, rather than pulling from an 80% zone.
This reduces the complexity of managing 80% pulled riders as no communication or coordination is required from officials in an 80% zone.

When doing early pull at the finish line, we cannot use the 80% time directly.  Rather, we need to adjust this time based on the number of laps remaining in the race.
This is done as follows:

EarlyPullTime = 80PercentTime * (RaceLaps - CurrentLap) / RaceLaps

For example, say a race was 10 laps and the 80PercentTime is 8 minutes.  When the leader starts the 2 to go lap, the EarlyPullTime = 8 minutes * (10-2)/10 = 6.4 minutes.
So, when the lap counter reads 2 to go, riders behind the leader by 6.4 minutes (or longer) should be pulled after they cross the finish line.

In this example, CrossMgr will indicate all riders who are 6.4 minutes behind the leader as elibigle for early pull with 2 to go.

The idea here is that __Early Pull__ is a time that projects where a rider will be when the leader finishes.

__Early Pull__ can also be used for an Early Bell strategy where indicated riders are given the bell at 2 to go.

__Early Pull__ is only enabled when the number of laps for a category is set explicitly and not computed from a race time.
This can be done from the [Categories][] page, or more easily from the [Record][] page.

## Click anywhere on the Row
Enters that number.  Eliminates retyping the number in Record screen.

## Right-Click on the Row

Option|Action
:-----|:-----
Enter...|Correct the current entry
DNF...|Mark this rider as DNF
Pull...|Pull this rider from the race (like DNF)
RiderDetail|Jump to the RiderDetail for this rider.

# Recorded
Shows the numbers just recorded during a race.  Between each group of riders (>= 1 second apart), a summary row is added showing the number of riders in the group (in brackets, shown in the __Num__ column) and the gap between groups (shown in the __Time__ column).

The columns in the table are as follows:

Column|Description
:-----|:----------
Bib|The rider's number
Note|Shows the riders position by category.  Leaders are highlighted in green.  The Race Leader is highlighted with a full green bar.  Riders outside of the 80% time rule are shown in red.  Riders eligible for "Early Pull" are shown in yellow with a pull symbol (⌦).  Riders starting their laps lap have a bell (🔔).  Riders finishing has a finish flag (🏁).  See the __Expected__ section above for details about __Early Pull__.
Lap|Shows the lap the rider is currently on.
Time|Shows the recorded time
Name|Shows the rider's name.  Requires linking an [External Excel][] sheet.

## Double-click
Jumps to the RiderDetail for the number clicked on.

## Right-Click
Right-click brings up a number of options about what you clicked on:

Option|Action
:-----|:-----
Correct...|Correct the current entry
Shift...|Shift current entry forward/backward in time
Split...|Split the current entry into two entries
Insert...|Insert a new time near an existing time
Delete...|Delete current entry
DNF...|Mark this rider as DNF
RiderDetail|Jump to the RiderDetail for this rider.

# Screens

Each screen can be selected by clicking on the tab at the top of the screen, or pressing the function key corresponding to the number on the tab.
For example, F3 selects the Results screen.

* [Actions][]
* [Record][]
* [Results][]
* [Pulled][]
* [Passings][]
* [RiderDetail][]
* [Chart][]
* [Animation][]
* [Recommendations][]
* [Categories][]
* [Properties][]

# Keyboard Accelerators

The following keyboard accelerators work from all screens:

Key|Action
:--|:-----
Ctrl-Z|Undo the last edit.  Multiple undos will keep undoing the last changes.
Ctrl-Y|Redo the last undo.  Multiple redos will keep redoing the last undos.
Ctrl-F|Opens the Find window.
Function Key 1..10|Jumps to the screen with the same number as the function key.
Shift-F1|Opens Help on the current screen.
Ctrl-H|Opens Help for the current screen in a web browser.  For full help, use the Help/Help menu.

#Edit Ctrl Keys

The following Ctrl keys work in all edit fields.  You can also cut-and-paste from external sources to/from CrossMgr.

Key|Action
:--|:-----
Ctrl-C|Copy selected text to clipboard
Ctrl-V|Paste clipboard text into edit field
Ctrl-X|Cut selected text to clipboard
Esc|Abort edit and restore previous value
