helptxt/Record.md, before:

[TOC]

# Record
The Record screen allows you to manual enter numbers.
It also support a number of real-time displays showing important details about the course.

# Screen
The screen is roughly divided into four parts:

1. [Number Entry](#number-entry)
1. [Race Information](#race-information)
1. [Riders on Course](#riders-on-course)
1. [Race Lap Chart](#race-lap-chart)

## Number Entry

This is the section of the screen where data is entered manually.  Data from chip timing flows into CrossMgr directly.

CrossMgr offers three methods to manually enter data: __Bib__, __Time Trial__ and __BibTime__.
Select the mode by changing the entry pane at the bottom on the first window on the screen.

In __Bib__ mode, the bib number is timestamped as soon as you press Enter.

In __TimeTrial__ mode, you "Tap for time" to get the time(s) first, then you add the bib number(s) to each time.  Think pressing to get times on a printing stopwatch, then writing the bib numbers next to the time.

In __Bib Time__ mode, you enter the bib number(s) first, then tap them to add the time.  As soon as you tap them, the bib numbers are timestamped and entered into the system.

Each approach has pros and cons, and you can switch modes at any time.  Generally speaking you will use the modes for:

Race Format|Input Mode
:----------|:---------
Cyclo Cross|Keypad
MTB|Keypad
Road|Keypad
Time Trial|TimeTrial or BibTime
Downhill|TimeTrial or BibTime

### Bib Entry Mode

When you enter a number in this mode, the number is "timestamped" immediately when you press __Enter__ (or __Tab__ or __Space__).
This is the standard input mode for Road, Cyclo Cross and MTB races when you have number caller, and riders arrive in quick succession on their laps.

When you hear the number caller, you type in the number on the keyboard and press __Enter__ (or __Tab__ or __Space__, whichever is most comvenient).
After the first lap of a race, CrossMgr will predict the arrival of each rider in the [Expected](MainScreen.html#expected) window.
To enter the number again, you just click on th number in the __Expected__ list rather than typing it in again.

Entering a number also triggers the [USB Webcam][] if it has been enabled.

You can enter data through the regular computer keyboard or an external numeric keypad.  If you have a touchscreen, you can also enter data by pressing the on-screen buttons.  To enable touchscreen mode, press on the touchscreen button.  This will toggle an on-screen keypad.

CrossMgr understands common leading digits and does not require that the full number of digits be entered if the leading digits are all the same.  For example, say you have one number range 100-199.  You can enter the following:

* 0 --> 100
* 1 --> 101
* 10 --> 110
* 150 --> 150 (three digits are always OK).

That is, common leading digits will automatically be added, and you don't need to type them.

CrossMgr only checks for leading digits, and it is not all-knowing.  For example, if you have ranges 100-120 and 250-270, CrossMgr is not smart enough to know that the last two digits are always unique.  In this case, all three digits will be required.

And of course, if there aren't common leading digits in all categories across the entire race, you will need to enter the entire digits.

Experience has shown that a touch-screen is less accurate.  Additionally, touch screens can get sluggish in cold or hot weather.  This is frustrating in a race situation when you are trying to enter a number and the touchscreen doesn't respond.  Use a keyboard or external keypad for reliability.

Pressing Esc, 'c' or 'C' will clear the input.  This can be a handy shortcut when you need to re-enter a number.

Tip: the most accurate way to enter numbers is to type in the number when you hear the number caller, then press an __Enter__ key just as the rider crosses the line.  This is primarily important in timetrials.  In bunch races, the objective is to get the passing order as the times are far less important.  When groups pass in bunch races, just enter the numbers as you hear them from the number caller.

You can enter multiple numbers separated by a comma.  After __Enter__, all those numbers will get the same time.  This is convenient for manual Team TT starts when you want all the riders on the same team
to get the same start time.

There are a number of buttons that apply to the Bib:

Button|Description
:-----|:----------
DNF|Enter the rider as a DNF, and uses the current time as the DNF time.
DNS|Enter the rider as a DNS.
Pull|Enters the rider as PUL, and uses the current time as the PUL time.
DQ|Enters the rider as DQ, and uses the current time as the DQ time.

Remember: if you change any rider's status here, you can always change it back again from the [RiderDetail][] screen.

### Time Trial Entry Mode

This is the traditional input mode for time trial finishes.  It follows a similar process to a manual stopwatch, except you use the computer.

In time trial mode, you get times as the riders pass by pressing the __Tap for Time__ button (similar to using a recording stopwatch).  This also triggers the [USB Webcam][] to take a picture, if enabled.  Rather then using the mouse, pressing the 't' key is a shortcut to __Tap for Time__.

You then enter the Bib numbers next to the times - you many not be able to see the number on the back of the rider until he/she has passed.

When you have entered the corresponding bib numbers for the times, press the __Save__ button.  This saves the input and clears the display for the next arrival(s).  Rather than using the mouse, pressing the 's' key is a shortcut to __Save__.

Press __Save__ as soon as you can.  This records the entry in CrossMgr.
Normally, you would __Tap for Time__ once, then enter the Bib for that time, then press __Save__.  One entry at a time.

It is important to get comfortable with doing this on the keyboard alone as it will save a __lot__ of mousing.  Consider using your left hand to operate the 't' and 's' keys, and your right hand to enter bib numbers from a numeric keypad.

Sometimes, 3-4 riders will bunch up at the finish.  In this case, press __Tap for Time__ for each each rider, enter the Bib for each rider, then press __Save__.

CrossMgr gives you up a number of entries before you must press Save.  If you see large groups of riders finishing together, they are drafting, which is not permitted.

If you cannot read a rider's number, and can't find it in time, enter an invalid, but unique temporary Bib number for the rider, say 8000.
After the race you can correct the number, but retain the correct time.  This is an exceptional process.

__Shortcut Key Summary__

Shortcut Key|Description
:-------|:----------
t|Equivalent to pressing the __Tap for Time__ button.
s|Equivalent to pressing the __Save__ button.

__Notes:__ The Time Trial input mode only works when there are start gaps between the riders and you have enough time to enter the bib numbers after tapping the times.
For a mass-start event, __Bib__ mode would work better.
If you have a large number riders, a [ChipReader][] is the way to go.
Also, pressing the Save button erases all the times.  Only press it when you are satisfied with the bib numbers and times.

If you know the bib numbers of the finishing time trial riders ahead of time, consider __Bib Time__ entry node described below.

### Bib Time Entry Mode

In __Bib Time__ mode, first you enter the Bib numbers, then you click on them to assign timestamps.
This is the opposite of Time Trial entry mode (Bibs first then Times vs Times first, then Bibs).

This method works best when you know the bib numbers of the riders approaching finish line with enough time to type them in.
This can be done with a spotter (perhaps on radio).  Sometimes you can see them.

After entering the Bib numbers, click on them exactly as the riders cross the finish line to give them the most accurate time.
You don't have to click on them in the same order they were entered - just click on each bib number crossing the line.

Right-clicking on bib numbers shows a menu allowing you to delete the entry or switch to other screens depending on the bib number.

You can also mark riders as DNF, DNS, Pul or DQ from this screen.
Remember: if you change any rider's status here, you can always change it back again from the [RiderDetail][] screen.

You can enter multiple numbers separated by a comma.  After __Enter__, all those numbers will be input.  This is convenient if you want a chance to review the numbers entered before you add them.

This method works well when you can get the bib numbers in advance and have enough time to enter them.  It is then easy to accurately click on the bib numbers as the riders cross the line.

__Notes:__ The Bib Time input mode relies on getting the bib numbers entered before the finish.  If you don't know the bib numbers until after the riders cross the line (for example, the rider's bib numbers are on their backs),
the method won't work.  It also requires enough time to enter the bib numbers before the riders get to the finish.  If riders are arriving in large groups, or the bib numbers are hard to read then this method
isn't going to work.  Consider chip timing.

For multi-lap courses, the __Expected__ column offers the same functionality to __Bib Time__ mode as it also allows you to click on the bib numbers to timestamp them.
Of course, this only works for multi-lap races because __Expected__ uses the previous lap times to predict when the rider is coming.
For time trial courses that are not multi-lap (eg. out-and-back), the __Bib Time__ mode could work better depending on your setup.

You can switch between __Time Trial__ mode and __Bib Time__ mode at any time.

## Race Information

Field|Description
:----|:----------
Race Time|The time since the race started.
Manual/Automatic Start|The time the race was started.  Start can be triggered by RFID depending on option.
Last Rider on Course|The est. finish time of the last rider on course.  Includes name, team and category.  Projected lapped and pulled riders are taken into account.  The Last Rider on Course may have nothing to do with the last rider in the race if riders are lapped.
Photo Count and Camera Button|Shows the photo count and camera button if the [USB Webcam][] is enabled.  Pressing the camera button brings up the last picture taken in the race.
Clock|The current time of day.

## Riders on Course

This display shows the total riders on course, a breakdown of the riders by category, and a count of which riders are on each lap.

## Race Lap Chart

This display shows graphically, by Category:

* the total number of laps in the race, and the laps to go
* the Category leader's number
* a Progress bar as showing where the leader is in the race
* a Timer counting down to when the leader is next expected
* the projected Finish Time of the race (finish line flag)
* the projected Expected Time of the last rider on course (broom)

Use this display to manage lap counters by category.  It allows you to easily see what lap each category is on, when to ring the last lap bell, etc.

For additional information, hover the mouse over the lap.  This will show more start/end times and lap time.

### Set Laps from the Lap Chart

To modify the number of laps during the race, click anywhere on the Progress bars.

This opens the __Set Laps__ dialog which makes it easy to change the number of laps during a race.  For more details, see [SetLaps][].

Commit message:

First-cut test success for Early Bell feature.

helptxt/Record.md, after:

[TOC]

# Record
The Record screen allows you to manual enter numbers.
It also support a number of real-time displays showing important details about the course.

# Screen
The screen is roughly divided into four parts:

1. [Number Entry](#number-entry)
1. [Race Information](#race-information)
1. [Riders on Course](#riders-on-course)
1. [Race Lap Chart](#race-lap-chart)

## Number Entry

This is the section of the screen where data is entered manually.  Data from chip timing flows into CrossMgr directly.

CrossMgr offers three methods to manually enter data: __Bib__, __Time Trial__ and __BibTime__.
Select the mode by changing the entry pane at the bottom on the first window on the screen.

In __Bib__ mode, the bib number is timestamped as soon as you press Enter.

In __TimeTrial__ mode, you "Tap for time" to get the time(s) first, then you add the bib number(s) to each time.  Think pressing to get times on a printing stopwatch, then writing the bib numbers next to the time.

In __Bib Time__ mode, you enter the bib number(s) first, then tap them to add the time.  As soon as you tap them, the bib numbers are timestamped and entered into the system.

Each approach has pros and cons, and you can switch modes at any time.  Generally speaking you will use the modes for:

Race Format|Input Mode
:----------|:---------
Cyclo Cross|Keypad
MTB|Keypad
Road|Keypad
Time Trial|TimeTrial or BibTime
Downhill|TimeTrial or BibTime

### Bib Entry Mode

When you enter a number in this mode, the number is "timestamped" immediately when you press __Enter__ (or __Tab__ or __Space__).
This is the standard input mode for Road, Cyclo Cross and MTB races when you have number caller, and riders arrive in quick succession on their laps.

When you hear the number caller, you type in the number on the keyboard and press __Enter__ (or __Tab__ or __Space__, whichever is most comvenient).
After the first lap of a race, CrossMgr will predict the arrival of each rider in the [Expected](MainScreen.html#expected) window.
To enter the number again, you just click on th number in the __Expected__ list rather than typing it in again.

Entering a number also triggers the [USB Webcam][] if it has been enabled.

You can enter data through the regular computer keyboard or an external numeric keypad.  If you have a touchscreen, you can also enter data by pressing the on-screen buttons.  To enable touchscreen mode, press on the touchscreen button.  This will toggle an on-screen keypad.

CrossMgr understands common leading digits and does not require that the full number of digits be entered if the leading digits are all the same.  For example, say you have one number range 100-199.  You can enter the following:

* 0 --> 100
* 1 --> 101
* 10 --> 110
* 150 --> 150 (three digits are always OK).

That is, common leading digits will automatically be added, and you don't need to type them.

CrossMgr only checks for leading digits, and it is not all-knowing.  For example, if you have ranges 100-120 and 250-270, CrossMgr is not smart enough to know that the last two digits are always unique.  In this case, all three digits will be required.

And of course, if there aren't common leading digits in all categories across the entire race, you will need to enter the entire digits.

Experience has shown that a touch-screen is less accurate.  Additionally, touch screens can get sluggish in cold or hot weather.  This is frustrating in a race situation when you are trying to enter a number and the touchscreen doesn't respond.  Use a keyboard or external keypad for reliability.

Pressing Esc, 'c' or 'C' will clear the input.  This can be a handy shortcut when you need to re-enter a number.

Tip: the most accurate way to enter numbers is to type in the number when you hear the number caller, then press an __Enter__ key just as the rider crosses the line.  This is primarily important in timetrials.  In bunch races, the objective is to get the passing order as the times are far less important.  When groups pass in bunch races, just enter the numbers as you hear them from the number caller.

You can enter multiple numbers separated by a comma.  After __Enter__, all those numbers will get the same time.  This is convenient for manual Team TT starts when you want all the riders on the same team
to get the same start time.

There are a number of buttons that apply to the Bib:

Button|Description
:-----|:----------
DNF|Enter the rider as a DNF, and uses the current time as the DNF time.
DNS|Enter the rider as a DNS.
Pull|Enters the rider as PUL, and uses the current time as the PUL time.
DQ|Enters the rider as DQ, and uses the current time as the DQ time.

Remember: if you change any rider's status here, you can always change it back again from the [RiderDetail][] screen.

### Time Trial Entry Mode

This is the traditional input mode for time trial finishes.  It follows a similar process to a manual stopwatch, except you use the computer.

In time trial mode, you get times as the riders pass by pressing the __Tap for Time__ button (similar to using a recording stopwatch).  This also triggers the [USB Webcam][] to take a picture, if enabled.  Rather then using the mouse, pressing the 't' key is a shortcut to __Tap for Time__.

You then enter the Bib numbers next to the times - you many not be able to see the number on the back of the rider until he/she has passed.

When you have entered the corresponding bib numbers for the times, press the __Save__ button.  This saves the input and clears the display for the next arrival(s).  Rather than using the mouse, pressing the 's' key is a shortcut to __Save__.

Press __Save__ as soon as you can.  This records the entry in CrossMgr.
Normally, you would __Tap for Time__ once, then enter the Bib for that time, then press __Save__.  One entry at a time.

It is important to get comfortable with doing this on the keyboard alone as it will save a __lot__ of mousing.  Consider using your left hand to operate the 't' and 's' keys, and your right hand to enter bib numbers from a numeric keypad.

Sometimes, 3-4 riders will bunch up at the finish.  In this case, press __Tap for Time__ for each each rider, enter the Bib for each rider, then press __Save__.

CrossMgr gives you up a number of entries before you must press Save.  If you see large groups of riders finishing together, they are drafting, which is not permitted.

If you cannot read a rider's number, and can't find it in time, enter an invalid, but unique temporary Bib number for the rider, say 8000.
After the race you can correct the number, but retain the correct time.  This is an exceptional process.

__Shortcut Key Summary__

Shortcut Key|Description
:-------|:----------
t|Equivalent to pressing the __Tap for Time__ button.
s|Equivalent to pressing the __Save__ button.

__Notes:__ The Time Trial input mode only works when there are start gaps between the riders and you have enough time to enter the bib numbers after tapping the times.
For a mass-start event, __Bib__ mode would work better.
If you have a large number riders, a [ChipReader][] is the way to go.
Also, pressing the Save button erases all the times.  Only press it when you are satisfied with the bib numbers and times.

If you know the bib numbers of the finishing time trial riders ahead of time, consider __Bib Time__ entry node described below.

### Bib Time Entry Mode

In __Bib Time__ mode, first you enter the Bib numbers, then you click on them to assign timestamps.
This is the opposite of Time Trial entry mode (Bibs first then Times vs Times first, then Bibs).

This method works best when you know the bib numbers of the riders approaching finish line with enough time to type them in.
This can be done with a spotter (perhaps on radio).  Sometimes you can see them.

After entering the Bib numbers, click on them exactly as the riders cross the finish line to give them the most accurate time.
You don't have to click on them in the same order they were entered - just click on each bib number crossing the line.

Right-clicking on bib numbers shows a menu allowing you to delete the entry or switch to other screens depending on the bib number.

You can also mark riders as DNF, DNS, Pul or DQ from this screen.
Remember: if you change any rider's status here, you can always change it back again from the [RiderDetail][] screen.

You can enter multiple numbers separated by a comma.  After __Enter__, all those numbers will be input.  This is convenient if you want a chance to review the numbers entered before you add them.

This method works well when you can get the bib numbers in advance and have enough time to enter them.  It is then easy to accurately click on the bib numbers as the riders cross the line.

__Notes:__ The Bib Time input mode relies on getting the bib numbers entered before the finish.  If you don't know the bib numbers until after the riders cross the line (for example, the rider's bib numbers are on their backs),
the method won't work.  It also requires enough time to enter the bib numbers before the riders get to the finish.  If riders are arriving in large groups, or the bib numbers are hard to read then this method
isn't going to work.  Consider chip timing.

For multi-lap courses, the __Expected__ column offers the same functionality to __Bib Time__ mode as it also allows you to click on the bib numbers to timestamp them.
Of course, this only works for multi-lap races because __Expected__ uses the previous lap times to predict when the rider is coming.
For time trial courses that are not multi-lap (eg. out-and-back), the __Bib Time__ mode could work better depending on your setup.

You can switch between __Time Trial__ mode and __Bib Time__ mode at any time.

## Race Information

Field|Description
:----|:----------
Race Time|The time since the race started.
Manual/Automatic Start|The time the race was started.  Start can be triggered by RFID depending on option.
Last Rider on Course|The est. finish time of the last rider on course.  Includes name, team and category.  Projected lapped and pulled riders are taken into account.  The Last Rider on Course may have nothing to do with the last rider in the race if riders are lapped.
Photo Count and Camera Button|Shows the photo count and camera button if the [USB Webcam][] is enabled.  Pressing the camera button brings up the last picture taken in the race.
Clock|The current time of day.

## Riders on Course

This display shows the total riders on course, a breakdown of the riders by category, and a count of which riders are on each lap.

## Race Lap Chart

This display shows graphically, by Category:

* the total number of laps in the race, and the laps to go
* the Category leader's number
* a Progress bar as showing where the leader is in the race
* a Timer counting down to when the leader is next expected
* the projected Finish Time of the race (finish line flag)
* the projected Expected Time of the last rider on course (broom)

Use this display to manage lap counters by category.  It allows you to easily see what lap each category is on, when to ring the last lap bell, etc.

For additional information, hover the mouse over the lap.  This will show more start/end times and lap time.

### Set Laps from the Lap Chart

To modify the number of laps during the race, click anywhere on the Progress bars (or Start Wave labels).

This opens the __Set Laps__ dialog which makes it easy to change the number of laps during a race.
This dialog shows the estimated finish times based on the number of laps, and allows you to meaningfully pick the number of laps.

The __Set Laps__ dialog is also the easiest way to set the __Early Bell Time__.
For more details, see [SetLaps][].
